<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: http://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>Endnotes</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="backmatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="endnotes" epub:type="rearnotes">
			<h2 epub:type="title">Endnotes</h2>
			<ol>
				<li data-se-note-number="1" id="note-1" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>[“<abbr class="initialism">A.B.C.</abbr>’s” signifes endemic teashops, found in all parts of London. The initials signify “Aerated Bread Company, Limited.” <cite>—Editor</cite>] <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-1" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="2" id="note-2" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Not only the title, but the plan and a good deal of the incidental symbolism of the poem were suggested by Miss Jessie L. Weston’s book on the Grail legend: <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">From Ritual to Romance</i> (Macmillan, Cambridge) Indeed, so deeply am I indebted, Miss Weston’s book will elucidate the difficulties of the poem much better than my notes can do; and I recommend it (apart from the great interest of the book itself) to any who think such elucidation of the poem worth the trouble. To another work of anthropology I am indebted in general, one which has influenced our generation profoundly; I mean <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">The Golden Bough</i>; I have used especially the two volumes <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Adonis, Attis, Osiris</i>. Anyone who is acquainted with these works will immediately recognise in the poem certain references to vegetation ceremonies. <cite>[⁠—The Author, and all notes not marked “Editor”]</cite> <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-2" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="3" id="note-3" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ezekiel</i> 2:1. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-3" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="4" id="note-4" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Ecclesiastes</i> 12:5. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-4" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="5" id="note-5" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Tristan und Isolde</i>, I, verses 5⁠–⁠8. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-5" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="6" id="note-6" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Tristan und Isolde</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, verse 24. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-6" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="7" id="note-7" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>I am not familiar with the exact constitution of the Tarot pack of cards, from which I have obviously departed to suit my own convenience. The Hanged Man, a member of the traditional pack, fits my purpose in two ways:  because he is associated in my mind with the Hanged God of Frazer, and because I associate him with the hooded figure in the passage of the disciples to Emmaus in Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. The Phoenician Sailor and the Merchant appear later; also the “crowds of people,” and Death by Water is executed in Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">IV</span>.  The Man with Three Staves (an authentic member of the Tarot pack) I associate, quite arbitrarily, with the Fisher King himself. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-7" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="8" id="note-8" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Baudelaire:</p>
					<p class="poetry" xml:lang="fr">
						<span>“Fourmillante cité, cité; pleine de rêves,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Où le spectre en plein jour raccroche le passant.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-8" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="9" id="note-9" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Inferno</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iii</span>. 55⁠–⁠7.</p>
					<p class="poetry right" xml:lang="it">
						<span>“si lunga tratta</span>
						<br/>
						<span>di gente, ch’io non avrei mai creduto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>che morte tanta n’avesse disfatta.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-9" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="10" id="note-10" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Inferno</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>.  25⁠–⁠7:</p>
					<p class="poetry" xml:lang="it">
						<span>“Quivi, secondo che per ascoltare,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“non avea pianto, ma’ che di sospiri,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“che l’aura eterna facevan tremare.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-10" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="11" id="note-11" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>A phenomenon which I have often noticed. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-11" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="12" id="note-12" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. the Dirge in Webster’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">White Devil</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-12" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="13" id="note-13" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Baudelaire, Preface to <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Fleurs du Mal</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-13" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="14" id="note-14" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Antony and Cleopatra</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>., l. 190. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-14" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="15" id="note-15" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Laquearia. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Aeneid</i>, I. 726:</p>
					<p class="poetry">
						<span>dependent lychni laquearibus aureis</span>
						<br/>
						<span>incensi, et noctem flammis funalia vincunt. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-15" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="16" id="note-16" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Sylvan scene. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. Milton, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Paradise Lost</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>. 140. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-16" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="17" id="note-17" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Ovid, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Metamorphoses</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>, Philomela. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-17" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="18" id="note-18" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <a href="../text/body.xhtml#forward-ref-18" epub:type="se:referrer">l. 204</a>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-18" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="19" id="note-19" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>, <a href="../text/body.xhtml#forward-ref-19" epub:type="se:referrer">l. 195</a>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-19" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="20" id="note-20" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Webster: “Is the wind in that door still?” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-20" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="21" id="note-21" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Part I, <a href="../text/body.xhtml#back-ref-21a" epub:type="se:referrer">l. 37</a>, <a href="../text/body.xhtml#back-ref-21b" epub:type="se:referrer">48</a>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-21" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="22" id="note-22" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. the game of chess in Middleton’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Women Beware Women</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-22" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="23" id="note-23" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Spenser, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Prothalamion</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-23" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="24" id="note-24" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Tempest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-24" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="25" id="note-25" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Marvell, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">To His Coy Mistress</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-25" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="26" id="note-26" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Day, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Parliament of Bees</i>:</p>
					<p class="poetry">
						<span>“When of the sudden, listening, you shall hear,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“A noise of horns and hunting, which shall bring</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Actaeon to Diana in the spring,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>“Where all shall see her naked skin …” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-26" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="27" id="note-27" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>I do not know the origin of the ballad from which these lines are taken: it was reported to me from Sydney, Australia. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-27" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="28" id="note-28" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Verlaine, <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Parsifal</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-28" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="29" id="note-29" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The currants were quoted at a price “carriage and insurance free to London”; and the Bill of Lading <abbr>etc.</abbr> were to be handed to the buyer upon payment of the sight draft. [“Carriage and insurance free:” <abbr class="initialism">c.i.f.</abbr> actually stands for “cost, insurance and freight” <cite>—Editor</cite>] <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-29" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="30" id="note-30" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Tiresias, although a mere spectator and not indeed a “character,” is yet the most important personage in the poem, uniting all the rest. Just as the one-eyed merchant, seller of currants, melts into the Phoenician Sailor, and the latter is not wholly distinct from Ferdinand Prince of Naples, so all the women are one woman, and the two sexes meet in Tiresias.  What Tiresias <em>sees</em>, in fact, is the substance of the poem. The whole passage from Ovid is of great anthropological interest:</p>
					<p class="poetry" xml:lang="it">
						<span>‘… Cum Iunone iocos et maior vestra profecto est</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quam, quae contingit maribus,’ dixisse, ‘voluptas.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Illa negat; placuit quae sit sententia docti</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Quaerere Tiresiae: venus huic erat utraque nota.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nam duo magnorum viridi coeuntia silva</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Corpora serpentum baculi violaverat ictu</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Deque viro factus, mirabile, femina septem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Egerat autumnos; octavo rursus eosdem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Vidit et ‘est vestrae si tanta potentia plagae,’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dixit ‘ut auctoris sortem in contraria mutet,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nunc quoque vos feriam!’ percussis anguibus isdem</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Forma prior rediit genetivaque venit imago.</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Arbiter hic igitur sumptus de lite iocosa</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Dicta Iovis firmat; gravius Saturnia iusto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Nec pro materia fertur doluisse suique</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Iudicis aeterna damnavit lumina nocte,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>At pater omnipotens (neque enim licet inrita cuiquam</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Facta dei fecisse deo) pro lumine adempto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Scire futura dedit poenamque levavit honore. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-30" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="31" id="note-31" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This may not appear as exact as Sappho’s lines, but I had in mind the “longshore” or “dory” fisherman, who returns at nightfall. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-31" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="32" id="note-32" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Goldsmith, the song in <i epub:type="se:name.music.song">The Vicar of Wakefield</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-32" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="33" id="note-33" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The Tempest</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">ii</span>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-33" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="34" id="note-34" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The interior of <abbr>St.</abbr> Magnus Martyr is to my mind one of the finest among Wren’s interiors. See <i epub:type="se:name.publication.pamphlet">The Proposed Demolition of Nineteen City Churches</i> (<abbr>P.S.</abbr> King &amp; Son, <abbr>Ltd.</abbr>). <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-34" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="35" id="note-35" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The Song of the (three) Thames-daughters begins here. From <a href="../text/body.xhtml#forward-ref-35a" epub:type="se:referrer">line 292</a> to <a href="../text/body.xhtml#forward-ref-35b" epub:type="se:referrer">306</a> inclusive they speak in turn. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span>. <i epub:type="se:name.music.opera">Götterdämmerung</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. i: the Rhine-daughters. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-35" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="36" id="note-36" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Froude, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Elizabeth</i>, Vol. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">I</span>, ch. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">iv</span>, letter of De Quadra to Philip of Spain:</p>
					<p>“In the afternoon we were in a barge, watching the games on the river. (The queen) was alone with Lord Robert and myself on the poop, when they began to talk nonsense, and went so far that Lord Robert at last said, as I was on the spot there was no reason why they should not be married if the queen pleased.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-36" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="37" id="note-37" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Purgatorio</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. 133:</p>
					<p class="poetry">
						<span>“Ricorditi di me, che son la Pia;</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Siena mi fe,’ disfecemi Maremma.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-37" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="38" id="note-38" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions</i>: “to Carthage then I came, where a cauldron of unholy loves sang all about mine ears.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-38" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="39" id="note-39" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The complete text of the Buddha’s Fire Sermon (which corresponds in importance to the Sermon on the Mount) from which these words are taken, will be found translated in the late Henry Clarke Warren’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Buddhism in Translation</i> (Harvard Oriental Series). <abbr>Mr.</abbr> Warren was one of the great pioneers of Buddhist studies in the Occident. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-39" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="40" id="note-40" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>From <abbr>St.</abbr> Augustine’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Confessions</i> again. The collocation of these two representatives of eastern and western asceticism, as the culmination of this part of the poem, is not an accident. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-40" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="41" id="note-41" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>In the first part of Part <span epub:type="z3998:roman">V</span> three themes are employed: the journey to Emmaus, the approach to the Chapel Perilous (see Miss Weston’s book) and the present decay of eastern Europe. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-41" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="42" id="note-42" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>This is <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Turdus aonalaschkae pallasii</i>, the hermit thrush, [now <i epub:type="z3998:taxonomy">Catharus guttatus</i> —<cite>Editor</cite>] which I have heard in Quebec County. Chapman says (<i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Handbook of Birds of Eastern North America</i>) “it is most at home in secluded woodland and thickety retreats. … Its notes are not remarkable for variety or volume, but in purity and sweetness of tone and exquisite modulation they are unequalled.” Its “water-dripping song” is justly celebrated. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-42" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="43" id="note-43" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>The following lines were stimulated by the account of one of the Antarctic expeditions (I forget which, but I think one of Shackleton’s): it was related that the party of explorers, at the extremity of their strength, had the constant delusion that there was <em>one more member</em> than could actually be counted. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-43" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="44" id="note-44" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Through <a href="../text/body.xhtml#forward-ref-44" epub:type="se:referrer">line 376</a>. Cf. Hermann Hesse, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Blick ins Chaos</i>:</p>
					<p xml:lang="de">“Schon ist halb Europa, schon ist zumindest der halbe Osten Europas auf dem Wege zum Chaos, fährt betrunken im heiligem Wahn am Abgrund entlang und singt dazu, singt betrunken und hymnisch wie Dmitri Karamasoff sang. Ueber diese Lieder lacht der Bürger beleidigt, der Heilige und Seher hört sie mit Tränen.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-44" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="45" id="note-45" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>“Datta, dayadhvam, damyata” (Give, sympathize, control). The fable of the meaning of the Thunder is found in the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Brihadaranyaka⁠—Upanishad</i>, 5, 1. A translation is found in Deussen’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Sechzig Upanishads des Veda</i>, p. 489. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-45" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="46" id="note-46" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. Webster, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">The White Devil</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">v</span>. <span epub:type="z3998:roman">vi</span>:</p>
					<p class="poetry right">
						<span>“… they’ll remarry</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Ere the worm pierce your winding-sheet, ere the spider</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Make a thin curtain for your epitaphs.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-46" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="47" id="note-47" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>Cf. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Inferno</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxxiii</span>. 46:</p>
					<p class="poetry">
						<span>“ed io sentii chiavar l’uscio di sotto</span>
						<br/>
						<span>all’orribile torre.”</span>
					</p>
					<p class="space-above">Also F. H. Bradley, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">Appearance and Reality</i>, p.  346:</p>
					<p>“My external sensations are no less private to myself than are my thoughts or my feelings. In either case my experience falls within my own circle, a circle closed on the outside; and, with all its elements alike, every sphere is opaque to the others which surround it. … In brief, regarded as an existence which appears in a soul, the whole world for each is peculiar and private to that soul.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-47" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="48" id="note-48" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>[aetherial: aethereal <cite>—Editor</cite>] <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-48" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="49" id="note-49" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Weston, <i epub:type="se:name.publication.book">From Ritual to Romance</i>; chapter on the Fisher King. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-49" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="50" id="note-50" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Purgatorio</i>, <span epub:type="z3998:roman">xxvi</span>. 148.</p>
					<p class="poetry">
						<span>“ ‘Ara vos prec per aquella valor</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘que vos guida al som de l’escalina,</span>
						<br/>
						<span>‘sovegna vos a temps de ma dolor.’</span>
						<br/>
						<span>Poi s’ascose nel foco che gli affina.” <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-50" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></span>
					</p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="51" id="note-51" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">Pervigilium Veneris</i>. Cf. Philomela in Parts <span epub:type="z3998:roman">II</span> and <span epub:type="z3998:roman">III</span>. [ceu: uti <cite>—Editor</cite>] <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-51" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="52" id="note-52" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Gérard de Nerval, Sonnet <i epub:type="se:name.publication.poem">El Desdichado</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-52" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="53" id="note-53" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p>V. Kyd’s <i epub:type="se:name.publication.play">Spanish Tragedy</i>. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-53" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
				<li data-se-note-number="54" id="note-54" epub:type="rearnote">
					<p><i xml:lang="sa">Shantih</i>. Repeated as here, a formal ending to an Upanishad. “The Peace which passeth understanding” is a feeble translation of the content of this word. <a href="../text/body.xhtml#note-54" epub:type="se:referrer">↩</a></p>
				</li>
			</ol>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
